The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Raven, by Edgar Allan Poe

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Raven

Author: Edgar Allan Poe

Commentator: Edmund C. Stedman

Illustrator: Gustave Doré

Release Date: November 30, 2005 [EBook #17192]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RAVEN ***




Produced by Jason Isbell, Melissa Er-Raqabi and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net.





Transcriber's Notes:

In the List of Illustrations I restored a missing single quote after "Lenore!":
  "'Wretch,' I cried, 'thy God hath lent thee--by these angels he hath sent thee
  Respite--respite and nepenthe from thy memories of Lenore!'"

The List of Illustrations uses 'visitor' where the poem and the actual
illustration use 'visiter'.


       *       *       *       *       *




THE RAVEN

BY
EDGAR ALLAN POE

ILLUSTRATED
BY GUSTAVE DORÉ

[Illustration]

WITH COMMENT BY EDMUND C. STEDMAN

NEW YORK

HARPER & BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS, FRANKLIN SQUARE
1884




Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1883, by
HARPER & BROTHERS,
In the Office of the Librarian of Congress, at Washington.

_All rights reserved._




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
WITH NAMES OF ENGRAVERS

Title-page, designed by Elihu Vedder.       _Frederick Juengling._

"Nevermore."                         _H. Claudius, G.J. Buechner._

ANANKE.                                             _H. Claudius._

"Once upon a midnight dreary, while I pondered, weak and weary,
Over many a quaint and curious volume of forgotten lore."
                                                    _R.A. Muller._

"Ah, distinctly I remember, it was in the bleak December,
And each separate dying ember wrought its ghost upon the floor."
                                                    _R.G. Tietze._

"Eagerly I wished the morrow; vainly I had sought to borrow
From my books surcease of sorrow--sorrow for the lost Lenore."
                                                    _H. Claudius._

"Sorrow for the lost Lenore."                     _W. Zimmermann._

"For the rare and radiant maiden whom the angels name Lenore--
                                          Nameless here for evermore."
                                            _Frederick Juengling._

"''T is some visitor entreating entrance at my chamber door--
Some late visitor entreating entrance at my chamber door.'"
                                                  _W. Zimmermann._

   --"Here I opened wide the door;--
Darkness there, and nothing more."                  _H. Claudius._

"Doubting, dreaming dreams no mortal ever dared to dream before."
                                                      _F.S. King._

"'Surely,' said I, 'surely that is something at my window lattice;
Let me see, then, what thereat is, and this mystery explore.'"
                                            _Frederick Juengling._

"Open here I flung the shutter."                     _T. Johnson._

             --"A stately Raven of the saintly days of yore.
Not the least obeisance made he; not a minute stopped or stayed he."
                                                 _R. Staudenbaur._

"Perched upon a bust of Pallas just above my chamber door--
                                          Perched, and sat, and nothing more."
                                                    _R.G. Tietze._

"Wandering from the Nightly shore." _Frederick Juengling._

"Till I scarcely more than muttered, 'Other friends have flown before--
On the morrow _he_ will leave me, as my hopes have flown before.'"
                                                   _Frank French._

"Then, upon the velvet sinking, I betook myself to linking
Fancy unto fancy."                                 _R. Schelling._

"But whose velvet violet lining with the lamplight gloating o'er
                                          _She_ shall press, ah, nevermore!"
                                                  _George Kruell._

"'Wretch,' I cried, 'thy God hath lent thee--by these angels he hath sent thee
Respite--respite and nepenthe from thy memories of Lenore!'"
                                               _Victor Bernstrom._

"On this home by Horror haunted."                _R. Staudenbaur._

                            "'Tell me truly, I implore--
Is there--_is_ there balm in Gilead?--tell me--tell me, I implore!'"
                                                  _W. Zimmermann._

"'Tell this soul with sorrow laden if, within the distant Aidenn,
It shall clasp a sainted maiden whom the angels name Lenore.'"
                                                      _F.S. King._

"'Be that word our sign of parting, bird or fiend!' I shrieked, upstarting."
                                                  _W. Zimmermann._

"'Get thee back into the tempest and the Night's Plutonian shore!'"
                                                  _Robert Hoskin._

"And my soul from out that shadow that lies floating on the floor
                                          Shall be lifted--nevermore!"
                                                    _R.G. Tietze._

The secret of the Sphinx.                        _R. Staudenbaur._




COMMENT ON THE POEM.


The secret of a poem, no less than a jest's prosperity, lies in the ear of
him that hears it. Yield to its spell, accept the poet's mood: this, after
all, is what the sages answer when you ask them of its value. Even though
the poet himself, in his other mood, tell you that his art is but sleight
of hand, his food enchanter's food, and offer to show you the trick of
it,--believe him not. Wait for his prophetic hour; then give yourself to
his passion, his joy or pain. "We are in Love's hand to-day!" sings
Gautier, in Swinburne's buoyant paraphrase,--and from morn to sunset we are
wafted on the violent sea: there is but one love, one May, one flowery
strand. Love is eternal, all else unreal and put aside. The vision has an
end, the scene changes; but we have gained something, the memory of a
charm. As many poets, so many charms. There is the charm of Evanescence,
that which lends to supreme beauty and grace an aureole of Pathos. Share
with Landor his one "night of memories and of sighs" for Rose Aylmer, and
you have this to the full.

And now take the hand of a new-world minstrel, strayed from some proper
habitat to that rude and dissonant America which, as Baudelaire saw, "was
for Poe only a vast prison through which he ran, hither and thither, with
the feverish agitation of a being created to breathe in a purer world," and
where "his interior life, spiritual as a poet, spiritual even as a
drunkard, was but one perpetual effort to escape the influence of this
antipathetical atmosphere." Clasp the sensitive hand of a troubled singer
dreeing thus his weird, and share with him the clime in which he
found,--never throughout the day, always in the night,--if not the Atlantis
whence he had wandered, at least a place of refuge from the bounds in which
by day he was immured.

To one land only he has power to lead you, and for one night only can you
share his dream. A tract of neither Earth nor Heaven: "No-man's-land," out
of Space, out of Time. Here are the perturbed ones, through whose eyes,
like those of the Cenci, the soul finds windows though the mind is dazed;
here spirits, groping for the path which leads to Eternity, are halted and
delayed. It is the limbo of "planetary souls," wherein are all moonlight
uncertainties, all lost loves and illusions. Here some are fixed in trance,
the only respite attainable; others

         "move fantastically
    To a discordant melody:"

while everywhere are

    "Sheeted Memories of the Past--
    Shrouded forms that start and sigh
    As they pass the wanderer by."

Such is the land, and for one night we enter it,--a night of astral phases
and recurrent chimes. Its monodies are twelve poems, whose music strives to
change yet ever is the same. One by one they sound, like the chiming of the
brazen and ebony clock, in "The Masque of the Red Death," which made the
waltzers pause with "disconcert and tremulousness and meditation," as often
as the hour came round.

Of all these mystical cadences, the plaint of _The Raven_, vibrating
through the portal, chiefly has impressed the outer world. What things go
to the making of a poem,--and how true in this, as in most else, that race
which named its bards "the makers"? A work is called out of the void. Where
there was nothing, it remains,--a new creation, part of the treasure of
mankind. And a few exceptional lyrics, more than others that are equally
creative, compel us to think anew how bravely the poet's pen turns things
unknown

          "to shapes, and gives to airy nothing
    A local habitation, and a name."

Each seems without a prototype, yet all fascinate us with elements wrested
from the shadow of the Supernatural. Now the highest imagination is
concerned about the soul of things; it may or may not inspire the Fantasy
that peoples with images the interlunar vague. Still, one of these lyrics,
in its smaller way, affects us with a sense of uniqueness, as surely as the
sublimer works of a supernatural cast,--Marlowe's "Faustus," the "Faust" of
Goethe, "Manfred," or even those ethereal masterpieces, "The Tempest" and
"A Midsummer Night's Dream." More than one, while otherwise unique, has
some burden or refrain which haunts the memory,--once heard, never
forgotten, like the tone of a rarely used but distinctive organ-stop.
Notable among them is Bürger's "Lenore," that ghostly and resonant ballad,
the lure and foil of the translators. Few will deny that Coleridge's
wondrous "Rime of the Ancient Mariner" stands at their very head. "Le
Juif-Errant" would have claims, had Beranger been a greater poet; and, but
for their remoteness from popular sympathy, "The Lady of Shalott" and "The
Blessed Damozel" might be added to the list. It was given to Edgar Allan
Poe to produce two lyrics, "The Bells" and _The Raven_, each of which,
although perhaps of less beauty than those of Tennyson and Rossetti, is a
unique. "Ulalume," while equally strange and imaginative, has not the
universal quality that is a portion of our test.

_The Raven_ in sheer poetical constituents falls below such pieces as "The
Haunted Palace," "The City in the Sea," "The Sleeper," and "Israfel." The
whole of it would be exchanged, I suspect, by readers of a fastidious cast,
for such passages as these:

    "Around, by lifting winds forgot,
    Resignedly beneath the sky
    The melancholy waters lie.

    No rays from the holy heaven come down
    On the long night-time of that town;
    But light from out the lurid sea
    Streams up the turrets silently--

           * * *

    Up many and many a marvellous shrine
    Whose wreathéd friezes intertwine
    The viol, the violet, and the vine.

           * * *

    No swellings tell that winds may be
    Upon some far-off happier sea--
    No heavings hint that winds have been
    On seas less hideously serene."

It lacks the aerial melody of the poet whose heart-strings are a lute:

    "And they say (the starry choir
      And the other listening things)
    That Israfeli's fire
    Is owing to that lyre
      By which he sits and sings--
    The trembling living wire
      Of those unusual strings."

But _The Raven_, like "The Bells" and "Annabel Lee," commends itself to the
many and the few. I have said elsewhere that Poe's rarer productions seemed
to me "those in which there is the appearance, at least, of
spontaneity,--in which he yields to his feelings, while dying falls and
cadences most musical, most melancholy, come from him unawares." This is
still my belief; and yet, upon a fresh study of this poem, it impresses me
more than at any time since my boyhood. Close acquaintance tells in favor
of every true work of art. Induce the man, who neither knows art nor cares
for it, to examine some poem or painting, and how soon its force takes hold
of him! In fact, he will overrate the relative value of the first good work
by which his attention has been fairly caught. _The Raven_, also, has
consistent qualities which even an expert must admire. In no other of its
author's poems is the motive more palpably defined. "The Haunted Palace" is
just as definite to the select reader, but Poe scarcely would have taken
that subtle allegory for bald analysis. _The Raven_ is wholly occupied with
the author's typical theme--the irretrievable loss of an idolized and
beautiful woman; but on other grounds, also, the public instinct is correct
in thinking it his representative poem.

A man of genius usually gains a footing with the success of some one
effort, and this is not always his greatest. Recognition is the more
instant for having been postponed. He does not acquire it, like a miser's
fortune, coin after coin, but "not at all or all in all." And thus with
other ambitions: the courtier, soldier, actor,--whatever their parts,--each
counts his triumph from some lucky stroke. Poe's Raven, despite augury, was
for him "the bird that made the breeze to blow." The poet settled in
New-York, in the winter of 1844-'45, finding work upon Willis's paper, "The
Evening Mirror," and eking out his income by contributions elsewhere. For
six years he had been an active writer, and enjoyed a professional
reputation; was held in both respect and misdoubt, and was at no loss for
his share of the ill-paid journalism of that day. He also had done much of
his very best work,--such tales as "Ligeia" and "The Fall of the House of
Usher," (the latter containing that mystical counterpart, in verse, of
Elihu Vedder's "A Lost Mind,") such analytic feats as "The Gold Bug" and
"The Mystery of Marie Roget." He had made proselytes abroad, and gained a
lasting hold upon the French mind. He had learned his own power and
weakness, and was at his prime, and not without a certain reputation. But
he had written nothing that was on the tongue of everybody. To rare and
delicate work some popular touch must be added to capture the general
audience of one's own time.

Through the industry of Poe's successive biographers, the hit made by _The
Raven_ has become an oft-told tale. The poet's young wife, Virginia, was
fading before his eyes, but lingered for another year within death's
shadow. The long, low chamber in the house near the Bloomingdale Road is
as famous as the room where Rouget de l'Isle composed the Marseillaise.
All have heard that the poem, signed "Quarles," appeared in the "American
Review," with a pseudo-editorial comment on its form; that Poe received ten
dollars for it; that Willis, the kindest and least envious of fashionable
arbiters, reprinted it with a eulogy that instantly made it town-talk. All
doubt of its authorship was dispelled when Poe recited it himself at a
literary gathering, and for a time he was the most marked of American
authors. The hit stimulated and encouraged him. Like another and prouder
satirist, he too found "something of summer" even "in the hum of insects."
Sorrowfully enough, but three years elapsed,--a period of influence, pride,
anguish, yet always of imaginative or critical labor,--before the final
defeat, before the curtain dropped on a life that for him was in truth a
tragedy, and he yielded to "the Conqueror Worm."

"The American Review: A Whig Journal" was a creditable magazine for the
time, double-columned, printed on good paper with clear type, and
illustrated by mezzotint portraits. Amid much matter below the present
standard, it contained some that any editor would be glad to receive. The
initial volume, for 1845, has articles by Horace Greeley, Donald Mitchell,
Walter Whitman, Marsh, Tuckerman, and Whipple. Ralph Hoyt's quaint poem,
"Old," appeared in this volume. And here are three lyrics by Poe: "The City
in the Sea," "The Valley of Unrest," and _The Raven_. Two of these were
built up,--such was his way,--from earlier studies, but the last-named came
out as if freshly composed, and almost as we have it now. The statement
that it was not afterward revised is erroneous. Eleven trifling changes
from the magazine-text appear in _The Raven and Other Poems_, 1845, a book
which the poet shortly felt encouraged to offer the public. These are
mostly changes of punctuation, or of single words, the latter kind made to
heighten the effect of alliteration. In Mr. Lang's pretty edition of Poe's
verse, brought out in the "Parchment Library," he has shown the instinct of
a scholar, and has done wisely, in going back to the text in the volume
just mentioned, as given in the London issue of 1846. The "standard"
Griswold collection of the poet's works abounds with errors. These have
been repeated by later editors, who also have made errors of their own. But
the text of _The Raven_, owing to the requests made to the author for
manuscript copies, was still farther revised by him; in fact, he printed it
in Richmond, just before his death, with the poetic substitution of
"seraphim whose foot-falls" for "angels whose faint foot-falls," in the
fourteenth stanza. Our present text, therefore, while substantially that of
1845, is somewhat modified by the poet's later reading, and is, I think,
the most correct and effective version of this single poem. The most
radical change from the earliest version appeared, however, in the volume
in 1845; the eleventh stanza originally having contained these lines,
faulty in rhyme and otherwise a blemish on the poem:

    "Caught from some unhappy master, whom unmerciful Disaster
    Followed fast and followed faster--so, when Hope he would adjure,
    Stern Despair returned, instead of the sweet Hope he dared adjure--
                                          That sad answer, 'Nevermore!'"

It would be well if other, and famous, poets could be as sure of making
their changes always improvements. Poe constantly rehandled his scanty show
of verse, and usually bettered it. _The Raven_ was the first of the few
poems which he nearly brought to completion before printing. It may be that
those who care for poetry lost little by his death. Fluent in prose, he
never wrote verse for the sake of making a poem. When a refrain of image
haunted him, the lyric that resulted was the inspiration, as he himself
said, of a passion, not of a purpose. This was at intervals so rare as
almost to justify the Fairfield theory that each was the product of a
nervous crisis.

What, then, gave the poet his clue to _The Raven_? From what misty
foundation did it rise slowly to a music slowly breathed? As usual, more
than one thing went to the building of so notable a poem. Considering the
longer sermons often preached on brief and less suggestive texts, I hope
not to be blamed for this discussion of a single lyric,--especially one
which an artist like Doré has made the subject of prodigal illustration.
Until recently I had supposed that this piece, and a few which its author
composed after its appearance, were exceptional in not having grown from
germs in his boyish verse. But Mr. Fearing Gill has shown me some
unpublished stanzas by Poe, written in his eighteenth year, and entitled,
"The Demon of the Fire." The manuscript appears to be in the poet's early
handwriting, and its genuineness is vouched for by the family in whose
possession it has remained for half a century. Besides the plainest germs
of "The Bells" and "The Haunted Palace" it contains a few lines somewhat
suggestive of the opening and close of _The Raven_. As to the rhythm of our
poem, a comparison of dates indicates that this was influenced by the
rhythm of "Lady Geraldine's Courtship." Poe was one of the first to honor
Miss Barrett's genius; he inscribed his collected poems to her as "the
noblest of her sex," and was in sympathy with her lyrical method. The
lines from her love-poem,

    "With a murmurous stir uncertain, in the air, the purple curtain
    Swelleth in and swelleth out around her motionless pale brows,"

found an echo in these:

    "And the silken sad uncertain rustling of each purple curtain
    Thrilled me--filled me with fantastic terrors never felt before."

Here Poe assumed a privilege for which he roughly censured Longfellow, and
which no one ever sought on his own premises without swift detection and
chastisement. In melody and stanzaic form, we shall see that the two poems
are not unlike, but in motive they are totally distinct. The generous
poetess felt nothing but the true originality of the poet. "This vivid
writing!" she exclaimed,--"this power which is felt!... Our great poet, Mr.
Browning, author of 'Paracelsus,' &c., is enthusiastic in his admiration of
the rhythm." Mr. Ingram, after referring to "Lady Geraldine," cleverly
points out another source from which Poe may have caught an impulse. In
1843, Albert Pike, the half-Greek, half-frontiersman, poet of Arkansas, had
printed in "The New Mirror," for which Poe then was writing, some verses
entitled "Isadore," but since revised by the author and called "The Widowed
Heart." I select from Mr. Pike's revision the following stanza, of which
the main features correspond with the original version:

    "Restless I pace our lonely rooms, I play our songs no more,
    The garish sun shines flauntingly upon the unswept floor;
    The mocking-bird still sits and sings, O melancholy strain!
    For my heart is like an autumn-cloud that overflows with rain;
                            Thou art lost to me forever, Isadore!"

Here we have a prolonged measure, a similarity of refrain, and the
introduction of a bird whose song enhances sorrow. There are other trails
which may be followed by the curious; notably, a passage which Mr. Ingram
selects from Poe's final review of "Barnaby Rudge":

     "The raven, too, * * * might have been made, more than we now see
     it, a portion of the conception of the fantastic Barnaby. * * * Its
     character might have performed, in regard to that of the idiot,
     much the same part as does, in music, the accompaniment in respect
     to the air."

Nevertheless, after pointing out these germs and resemblances, the value of
this poem still is found in its originality. The progressive music, the
scenic detail and contrasted light and shade,--above all, the spiritual
passion of the nocturn, make it the work of an informing genius. As for the
gruesome bird, he is unlike all the other ravens of his clan, from the "twa
corbies" and "three ravens" of the balladists to Barnaby's rumpled "Grip."
Here is no semblance of the cawing rook that haunts ancestral turrets and
treads the field of heraldry; no boding phantom of which Tickell sang that,
when,

            "shrieking at her window thrice,
        The raven flap'd his wing,
    Too well the love-lorn maiden knew
        The solemn boding sound."

Poe's raven is a distinct conception; the incarnation of a mourner's agony
and hopelessness; a sable embodied Memory, the abiding chronicler of doom,
a type of the Irreparable. Escaped across the Styx, from "the Night's
Plutonian shore," he seems the imaged soul of the questioner himself,--of
him who can not, will not, quaff the kind nepenthe, because the memory of
Lenore is all that is left him, and with the surcease of his sorrow even
that would be put aside.

_The Raven_ also may be taken as a representative poem of its author, for
its exemplification of all his notions of what a poem should be. These are
found in his essays on "The Poetic Principle," "The Rationale of Verse,"
and "The Philosophy of Composition." Poe declared that "in Music, perhaps,
the soul most nearly attains the great end for which, when inspired by the
Poetic Sentiment, it struggles--the creation of supernal Beauty.... Verse
cannot be better designated than as an inferior or less capable music"; but
again, verse which is really the "Poetry of Words" is "The Rhythmical
Creation of Beauty,"--this and nothing more. The _tone_ of the highest
Beauty is one of Sadness. The most melancholy of topics is Death. This must
be allied to Beauty. "The death, then, of a beautiful woman is,
unquestionably, the most poetical topic in the world,--and equally is it
beyond doubt that the lips best suited for such a topic are those of a
bereaved lover." These last expressions are quoted from Poe's whimsical
analysis of this very poem, but they indicate precisely the general range
of his verse. The climax of "The Bells" is the muffled monotone of ghouls,
who glory in weighing down the human heart. "Lenore," _The Raven_, "The
Sleeper," "To One in Paradise," and "Ulalume" form a tenebrose
symphony,--and "Annabel Lee," written last of all, shows that one theme
possessed him to the end. Again, these are all nothing if not musical, and
some are touched with that quality of the Fantastic which awakes the sense
of awe, and adds a new fear to agony itself. Through all is dimly outlined,
beneath a shadowy pall, the poet's ideal love,--so often half-portrayed
elsewhere,--the entombed wife of Usher, the Lady Ligeia, in truth the
counterpart of his own nature. I suppose that an artist's love for one "in
the form" never can wholly rival his devotion to some ideal. The woman near
him must exercise her spells, be all by turns and nothing long, charm him
with infinite variety, or be content to forego a share of his allegiance.
He must be lured by the Unattainable, and this is ever just beyond him in
his passion for creative art.

Poe, like Hawthorne, came in with the decline of the Romantic school, and
none delighted more than he to laugh at its calamity. Yet his heart was
with the romancers and their Oriental or Gothic effects. His invention, so
rich in the prose tales, seemed to desert him when he wrote verse; and his
judgment told him that long romantic poems depend more upon incident than
inspiration,--and that, to utter the poetry of romance, lyrics would
suffice. Hence his theory, clearly fitted to his own limitations, that "a
'long poem' is a flat contradiction in terms." The components of _The
Raven_ are few and simple: a man, a bird, and the phantasmal memory at a
woman. But the piece affords a fine display of romantic material. What have
we? The midnight; the shadowy chamber with its tomes of forgotten lore; the
student,--a modern Hieronymus; the raven's tap on the casement; the wintry
night and dying fire; the silken wind-swept hangings; the dreams and vague
mistrust of the echoing darkness; the black, uncanny bird upon the pallid
bust; the accessories of violet velvet and the gloating lamp. All this
stage effect of situation, light, color, sound, is purely romantic, and
even melodramatic, but of a poetic quality that melodrama rarely exhibits,
and thoroughly reflective of the poet's "eternal passion, eternal pain."

The rhythmical structure of _The Raven_ was sure to make an impression.
Rhyme, alliteration, the burden, the stanzaic form, were devised with
singular adroitness. Doubtless the poet was struck with the aptness of Miss
Barrett's musical trochaics, in "eights," and especially by the arrangement
adopted near the close of "Lady Geraldine":

    "'Eyes,' he said, 'now throbbing through me! Are ye eyes that did undo me?
    Shining eyes, like antique jewels set in Parian statue-stone!
    Underneath that calm white forehead, are ye ever burning torrid
    O'er the desolate sand-desert of my heart and life undone?'"

His artistic introduction of a third rhyme in both the second and fourth
lines, and the addition of a fifth line and a final refrain, made the
stanza of _The Raven_. The persistent alliteration seems to come without
effort, and often the rhymes within lines are seductive; while the refrain
or burden dominates the whole work. Here also he had profited by Miss
Barrett's study of ballads and romaunts in her own and other tongues. A
"refrain" is the lure wherewith a poet or a musician holds the wandering
ear,--the recurrent longing of Nature for the initial strain. I have always
admired the beautiful refrains of the English songstress,--"The
Nightingales, the Nightingales," "Margret, Margret," "My Heart and I,"
"Toll slowly," "The River floweth on," "Pan, Pan is dead," etc. She also
employed what I term the Repetend, in the use of which Poe has excelled all
poets since Coleridge thus revived it:

    "O happy living things! no tongue
    Their beauty might declare:
    A spring of love gushed from my heart,
    And I blessed them unaware:
    Sure my kind saint took pity on me,
    And I blessed them unaware."

Poe created the fifth line of his stanza for the magic of the repetend. He
relied upon it to the uttermost in a few later poems,--"Lenore," "Annabel
Lee," "Ulalume," and "For Annie." It gained a wild and melancholy music, I
have thought, from the "sweet influences," of the Afric burdens and
repetends that were sung to him in childhood, attuning with their native
melody the voice of our Southern poet.

"The Philosophy of Composition," his analysis of _The Raven_, is a
technical dissection of its method and structure. Neither his avowal of
cold-blooded artifice, nor his subsequent avowal to friends that an
exposure of this artifice was only another of his intellectual hoaxes, need
be wholly credited. If he had designed the complete work in advance, he
scarcely would have made so harsh a prelude of rattle-pan rhymes to the
delicious melody of the second stanza,--not even upon his theory of the
fantastic. Of course an artist, having perfected a work, sees, like the
first Artist, that it is good, and sees why it is good. A subsequent
analysis, coupled with a disavowal of any sacred fire, readily enough may
be made. My belief is that the first conception and rough draft of this
poem came as inspiration always comes; that its author then saw how it
might be perfected, giving it the final touches described in his chapter on
Composition, and that the latter, therefore, is neither wholly false nor
wholly true. The harm of such analysis is that it tempts a novice to fancy
that artificial processes can supersede imagination. The impulse of genius
is to guard the secrets of its creative hour. Glimpses obtained of the
toil, the baffled experiments, which precede a triumph, as in the
sketch-work of Hawthorne recently brought to light, afford priceless
instruction and encouragement to the sincere artist. But one who
voluntarily exposes his Muse to the gaze of all comers should recall the
fate of King Candaules.

The world still thinks of Poe as a "luckless man of genius." I recently
heard him mentioned as "one whom everybody seems chartered to misrepresent,
decry or slander." But it seems to me that his ill-luck ended with his
pitiable death, and that since then his defence has been persistent, and
his fame of as steadfast growth as a suffering and gifted author could pray
for in his hopeful hour. Griswold's decrial and slander turned the current
in his favor. Critics and biographers have come forward with successive
refutations, with tributes to his character, with new editions of his
works. His own letters and the minute incidents of his career are before
us; the record, good and bad, is widely known. No appellor has received
more tender and forgiving judgement. His mishaps in life belonged to his
region and period, perchance still more to his own infirmity of will.
Doubtless his environment was not one to guard a fine-grained, ill-balanced
nature from perils without and within. His strongest will, to be lord of
himself, gained for him "that heritage of woe." He confessed himself the
bird's unhappy master, the stricken sufferer of this poem. But his was a
full share of that dramatic temper which exults in the presage of its own
doom. There is a delight in playing one's high part: we are all gladiators,
crying _Ave Imperator!_ To quote Burke's matter of fact: "In grief the
pleasure is still uppermost, and the affliction we suffer has no
resemblance to absolute pain, which is always odious, and which we endeavor
to shake off as soon as possible." Poe went farther, and was an artist even
in the tragedy of his career. If, according to his own belief, sadness and
the vanishing of beauty are the highest poetic themes, and poetic feeling
the keenest earthly pleasure, then the sorrow and darkness of his broken
life were not without their frequent compensation.

In the following pages, we have a fresh example of an artist's genius
characterizing his interpretation of a famous poem. Gustave Doré, the last
work of whose pencil is before us, was not the painter, or even the
draughtsman, for realists demanding truth of tone, figure, and perfection.
Such matters concerned him less than to make shape and distance, light and
shade, assist his purpose,--which was to excite the soul, the imagination,
of the looker on. This he did by arousing our sense of awe, through
marvellous and often sublime conceptions of things unutterable and full of
gloom or glory. It is well said that if his works were not great paintings,
as pictures they are great indeed. As a "literary artist," and such he was,
his force was in direct ratio with the dramatic invention of his author,
with the brave audacities of the spirit that kindled his own. Hence his
success with Rabelais, with "Le Juif-Errant," "Les Contes Drolatiques," and
"Don Quixote," and hence, conversely, his failure to express the beauty of
Tennyson's Idyls, of "Il Paradiso," of the Hebrew pastorals, and other
texts requiring exaltation, or sweetness and repose. He was a born master
of the grotesque, and by a special insight could portray the spectres of a
haunted brain. We see objects as his personages saw them, and with the very
eyes of the Wandering Jew, the bewildered Don, or the goldsmith's daughter
whose fancy so magnifies the King in the shop on the Pont-au-Change. It was
in the nature of things that he should be attracted to each masterpiece of
verse or prose that I have termed unique. The lower kingdoms were called
into his service; his rocks, trees and mountains, the sky itself, are
animate with motive and diablerie. Had he lived to illustrate Shakespeare,
we should have seen a remarkable treatment of Caliban, the Witches, the
storm in "Lear"; but doubtless should have questioned his ideals of Imogen
or Miranda. Beauty pure and simple, and the perfect excellence thereof, he
rarely seemed to comprehend.

Yet there is beauty in his designs for the "Ancient Mariner," unreal as
they are, and a consecutiveness rare in a series by Doré. The Rime afforded
him a prolonged story, with many shiftings of the scene. In _The Raven_
sound and color preserve their monotone and we have no change of place or
occasion. What is the result? Doré proffers a series of variations upon the
theme as he conceived it, "the enigma of death and the hallucination of an
inconsolable soul." In some of these drawings his faults are evident;
others reveal his powerful originality, and the best qualities in which, as
a draughtsman, he stood alone. Plainly there was something in common
between the working moods of Poe and Doré. This would appear more clearly
had the latter tried his hand upon the "Tales of the Grotesque and
Arabesque." Both resorted often to the elf-land of fantasy and romance. In
melodramatic feats they both, through their command of the supernatural,
avoided the danger-line between the ideal and the absurd. Poe was the truer
worshipper of the Beautiful; his love for it was a consecrating passion,
and herein he parts company with his illustrator. Poet or artist, Death at
last transfigures all: within the shadow of his sable harbinger, Vedder's
symbolic crayon aptly sets them face to face, but enfolds them with the
mantle of immortal wisdom and power. An American woman has wrought the
image of a star-eyed Genius with the final torch, the exquisite semblance
of one whose vision beholds, but whose lips may not utter, the mysteries of
a land beyond "the door of a legended tomb."

EDMUND C. STEDMAN.




THE POEM.




[Illustration]




THE RAVEN.


Once upon a midnight dreary, while I pondered, weak and weary,
Over many a quaint and curious volume of forgotten lore,
While I nodded, nearly napping, suddenly there came a tapping,
As of some one gently rapping, rapping at my chamber door.
"'T is some visiter," I muttered, "tapping at my chamber door--
                                          Only this, and nothing more."

Ah, distinctly I remember it was in the bleak December,
And each separate dying ember wrought its ghost upon the floor.
Eagerly I wished the morrow:--vainly I had sought to borrow
From my books surcease of sorrow--sorrow for the lost Lenore--
For the rare and radiant maiden whom the angels name Lenore--
                                          Nameless here for evermore.

And the silken sad uncertain rustling of each purple curtain
Thrilled me--filled me with fantastic terrors never felt before;
So that now, to still the beating of my heart, I stood repeating
"'T is some visiter entreating entrance at my chamber door
Some late visiter entreating entrance at my chamber door;--
                                          This it is, and nothing more."

Presently my soul grew stronger; hesitating then no longer,
"Sir," said I, "or Madam, truly your forgiveness I implore;
But the fact is I was napping, and so gently you came rapping,
And so faintly you came tapping, tapping at my chamber door,
That I scarce was sure I heard you"--here I opened wide the door;--
                                          Darkness there, and nothing more.

Deep into that darkness peering, long I stood there wondering, fearing,
Doubting, dreaming dreams no mortal ever dared to dream before;
But the silence was unbroken, and the darkness gave no token,
And the only word there spoken was the whispered word, "Lenore!"
This I whispered, and an echo murmured back the word, "Lenore!"
                                          Merely this and nothing more.

Back into the chamber turning, all my soul within me burning,
Soon again I heard a tapping, somewhat louder than before.
"Surely," said I, "surely that is something at my window lattice;
Let me see, then, what thereat is, and this mystery explore--
Let my heart be still a moment and this mystery explore;--
                                          'T is the wind and nothing more!"

Open here I flung the shutter, when, with many a flirt and flutter,
In there stepped a stately Raven of the saintly days of yore.
Not the least obeisance made he; not a minute stopped or stayed he;
But, with mien of lord or lady, perched above my chamber door--
Perched upon a bust of Pallas just above my chamber door--
                                          Perched, and sat, and nothing more.

Then this ebony bird beguiling my sad fancy into smiling,
By the grave and stern decorum of the countenance it wore,
"Though thy crest be shorn and shaven, thou," I said, "art sure no craven,
Ghastly grim and ancient Raven wandering from the Nightly shore,--
Tell me what thy lordly name is on the Night's Plutonian shore!"
                                          Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

Much I marvelled this ungainly fowl to hear discourse so plainly,
Though its answer little meaning--little relevancy bore;
For we cannot help agreeing that no living human being
Ever yet was blessed with seeing bird above his chamber door--
Bird or beast upon the sculptured bust above his chamber door,
                                          With such name as "Nevermore."

But the Raven, sitting lonely on the placid bust, spoke only
That one word, as if his soul in that one word he did outpour.
Nothing further then he uttered--not a feather then he fluttered--
Till I scarcely more than muttered, "Other friends have flown before--
On the morrow _he_ will leave me, as my hopes have flown before."
                                          Then the bird said, "Nevermore."

Startled at the stillness broken by reply so aptly spoken,
"Doubtless," said I, "what it utters is its only stock and store,
Caught from some unhappy master whom unmerciful Disaster
Followed fast and followed faster till his songs one burden bore--
Till the dirges of his Hope that melancholy burden bore
                                          Of 'Never--nevermore.'"

But the Raven still beguiling all my sad soul into smiling,
Straight I wheeled a cushioned seat in front of bird and bust and door;
Then, upon the velvet sinking, I betook myself to linking
Fancy unto fancy, thinking what this ominous bird of yore--
What this grim, ungainly, ghastly, gaunt and ominous bird of yore
                                          Meant in croaking "Nevermore."

This I sat engaged in guessing, but no syllable expressing
To the fowl whose fiery eyes now burned into my bosom's core;
This and more I sat divining, with my head at ease reclining
On the cushion's velvet lining that the lamplight gloated o'er,
But whose velvet violet lining with the lamplight gloating o'er
                                          _She_ shall press, ah, nevermore!

Then, methought, the air grew denser, perfumed from an unseen censer
Swung by seraphim whose foot-falls tinkled on the tufted floor.
"Wretch," I cried, "thy God hath lent thee--by these angels he hath sent thee
Respite--respite and nepenthe from thy memories of Lenore!
Quaff, oh quaff this kind nepenthe, and forget this lost Lenore!"
                                          Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

"Prophet!" said I, "thing of evil!--prophet still, if bird or devil!--
Whether Tempter sent, or whether tempest tossed thee here ashore,
Desolate yet all undaunted, on this desert land enchanted--
On this home by Horror haunted--tell me truly, I implore--
Is there--_is_ there balm in Gilead?--tell me--tell me, I implore!"
                                          Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

"Prophet!" said I, "thing of evil--prophet still, if bird or devil!
By that Heaven that bends above, us--by that God we both adore--
Tell this soul with sorrow laden if, within the distant Aidenn,
It shall clasp a sainted maiden whom the angels name Lenore--
Clasp a rare and radiant maiden whom the angels name Lenore."
                                          Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

"Be that word our sign of parting, bird or fiend!" I shrieked, upstarting--
"Get thee back into the tempest and the Night's Plutonian shore!
Leave no black plume as a token of that lie thy soul hath spoken!
Leave my loneliness unbroken!--quit the bust above my door!
Take thy beak from out my heart, and take thy form from off my door!"
                                          Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

And the Raven, never flitting, still is sitting, still is sitting
On the pallid bust of Pallas just above my chamber door;
And his eyes have all the seeming of a demon's that is dreaming,
And the lamplight o'er him streaming throws his shadow on the floor;
And my soul from out that shadow that lies floating on the floor
                                          Shall be lifted--nevermore!




[Illustration]


    "Once upon a midnight dreary, while I pondered, weak and weary,
    Over many a quaint and curious volume of forgotten lore."


[Illustration]


    "Ah, distinctly I remember it was in the bleak December,
    And each separate dying ember wrought its ghost upon the floor."


[Illustration]


    "Eagerly I wished the morrow;--vainly I had sought to borrow
    From my books surcease of sorrow--sorrow for the lost Lenore."


[Illustration]


"Sorrow for the lost Lenore."


[Illustration]


    "For the rare and radiant maiden whom the angels name Lenore--
                                      Nameless here for evermore."


[Illustration]


    "'T is some visiter entreating entrance at my chamber door--
    Some late visiter entreating entrance at my chamber door."


[Illustration]


    "Here I opened wide the door;--
                                      Darkness there, and nothing more."


[Illustration]


    "Doubting, dreaming dreams no mortal ever dared to dream before."


[Illustration]


    "'Surely,' said I, 'surely that is something at my window lattice;
    Let me see, then, what thereat is, and this mystery explore.'"


[Illustration]


    "Open here I flung the shutter."


[Illustration]


    ... "A stately Raven of the saintly days of yore.
    Not the least obeisance made he; not a minute stopped or stayed he."


[Illustration]


    "Perched upon a bust of Pallas just above my chamber door--
                                      Perched, and sat, and nothing more."


[Illustration]


    "Wandering from the Nightly shore."


[Illustration]


    "Till I scarcely more than muttered, 'Other friends have flown before--
    On the morrow _he_ will leave me, as my hopes have flown before.'"


[Illustration]


    "Then, upon the velvet sinking, I betook myself to linking
    Fancy unto fancy."


[Illustration]


    "But whose velvet violet lining with the lamplight gloating o'er
                                      _She_ shall press, ah, nevermore!"


[Illustration]


    "'Wretch,' I cried, 'thy God hath lent thee--by these angels he hath sent thee
    Respite--respite and nepenthe from thy memories of Lenore!'"


[Illustration]


    "On this home by Horror haunted."


[Illustration]


    ... "Tell me truly, I implore--
    Is there--_is_ there balm in Gilead?--tell me--tell me, I implore!"


[Illustration]


    "Tell this soul with sorrow laden if, within the distant Aidenn,
    It shall clasp a sainted maiden whom the angels name Lenore."


[Illustration]


    "'Be that word our sign of parting, bird or fiend!' I shrieked, upstarting."


[Illustration]


    "'Get thee back into the tempest and the Night's Plutonian shore!'"


[Illustration]


    "And my soul from out that shadow that lies floating on the floor
                                      Shall be lifted--nevermore!"


[Illustration]


[Illustration]






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Raven, by Edgar Allan Poe

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RAVEN ***

***** This file should be named 17192-8.txt or 17192-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/7/1/9/17192/

Produced by Jason Isbell, Melissa Er-Raqabi and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***
